Draft: Apply Margaret's changes as best as possible with formatting (#95)
radext-wg/draft-ietf-radext-radiusdtls-bis: draft-ietf-radext-radiusdtls-bis.md

Although RADIUS/(D)TLS does not remove the MD5-based mechanisms, it adds confidentiality and integrity protection through the TLS layer.
For an updated version of RADIUS/(D)TLS without need for MD5 see {{?RFC9765}}.

This specification largely preserves the format and processing of RADIUS packets, as defined in {{RFC2865}}, {{RFC2866}} and {{RFC5176}}.
However, there are some minor changes required to RADIUS packet processing, which are discussed in {{radiuschanges}}.

# Conventions and Terminology

RadSec:

> : A collective term for RADIUS/TLS and RADIUS/DTLS.

Author: ```suggestion
{::boilerplate bcp14-tagged}
```

This is the BCP14 boilerplate, it's important.

The following terminology is used in this document:

RADIUS packet:
: As defined in {{RFC2865}}.

RADIUS packet type:
: As defined in {{RFC2865}}.

RADIUS/TLS:
: A RADIUS exchange transmitted using TLS over TCP.

RADIUS/DTLS:
: A RADIUS exchange transmitted using DTLS over UDP.

RadSec:
: A collective term for RADIUS/TLS and RADIUS/DTLS.

RADIUS/UDP:
: RADIUS transported over UDP as defined in {{RFC2865}}.

(D)TLS handshake message:
: As defined in TLS {{RFC5246}} and DTLS {{RFC9147}}.

(D)TLS record:

> : As defined in DTLS {{RFC9147}}. A DTLS record is always contained in one UDP datagram.

Reviewer: I think TLS and DLTS records are slightly different and specified in different RFCs. I propose to keep the original definitions.

UDP (datagram) data:
: The data payload of a UDP datagram.

RadSec endpoint:
: A RADIUS-over-(D)TLS client or server

RadSec client:
: A RadSec instance that initiates a new connection.

RadSec server:
: A RadSec instance that listens on a RADIUS-over-(D)TLS port and accepts new connections.

Whenever "(D)TLS" or "RADIUS/(D)TLS" is mentioned, the specification applies for both RADIUS/TLS and RADIUS/DTLS.
Where "TLS" or "RADIUS/TLS" is mentioned, the specification only applies to RADIUS/TLS, where "DTLS" or "RADIUS/DTLS" is mentioned it only applies to RADIUS/DTLS.

Server implementations MUST support both RADIUS/TLS and RADIUS/DTLS.
Client implementations SHOULD implement both, but MUST implement at least one of RADIUS/TLS or RADIUS/DTLS.

# RadSec Packet and Connection Handling

This section defines the behavior of RadSec endpoints for the handling incoming TCP or UDP packets and the establishment of a (D)TLS connection.

Whenever "(D)TLS" or "RADIUS/(D)TLS" is mentioned, the specification applies for both RADIUS/TLS and RADIUS/DTLS.

> Where "TLS" or "RADIUS/TLS" is mentioned, the specification only applies to RADIUS/TLS, where "DTLS" or "RADIUS/DTLS" is mentioned it only applies to RADIUS/DTLS.

Reviewer: This is a duplicate form the definitions section, do we need to repeat it here?

* Implementations SHOULD NOT keep a connection open for longer than the validity span of the endpoint certificate. At the time the endpoint certificate expires, the connection SHOULD be closed and re-opened.

RadSec endpoints SHOULD NOT be pre-configured with a list of trusted CAs by the vendor or manufacturer that are enabled by default.
Instead, the endpoints SHOULD start off with an empty CA list as trust anchor.
The addition of a CA SHOULD be done only when manually configured by the administrator.
This does not preclude vendors or manufacturers including their trust list in their products, but the enabling of those lists should be a conscious decision by an administrator.

RADIUS/(D)TLS clients and servers MUST follow {{!RFC9525}} when validating endpoint identities. Specific details are provided below:

* Certificates MAY use wildcards in the identifiers of DNS names and realm names, but only as the complete, left-most label.

> * RadSec clients validate the servers identity to match their local configuration, accepting the identity on the first match:

Author: ```suggestion
* RadSec clients validate the server's identity to match their local configuration, accepting the identity on the first match:
```

  * If the expected RadSec server is associated with a specific NAI realm, e.g. by dynamic discovery {{!RFC7585}} or static configuration, that realm is matched against the presented identifiers of any subjectAltName entry of type otherName whose name form is NAIRealm as defined in {{!RFC7585, Section 2.2}}.
  * If the expected RadSec server was configured as a hostname, or the hostname was yielded by a dynamic discovery procedure, that name is matched against the presented identifiers of any subjectAltName entry of type dNSName {{!RFC5280}}.  Since a dynamic discovery might by itself not be secured, implementations MAY require the use of DNSSEC {{!RFC4033}} to ensure the authenticity of the DNS result before considering this identity as valid.
  * If the expected RadSec server was configured as an IP address, the configured IP address is matched against the presented identifier in any subjectAltName entry of type iPAddress {{!RFC5280}}.
  * The Common Name RDN MUST NOT be used to identify a server.

>   * Clients MAY use other attributes of the certificate to validate the server's identity, but it MUST NOT accept any certificate without validation.

Author: ```suggestion
  * Clients MAY use other attributes of the certificate to validate the server's identity, but they MUST NOT accept any certificate without validation.
```

All RadSec server implementations MUST implement this model.
RadSec client implementations SHOULD implement this model, but MUST implement either this model or TLS-PSK.

> Implementations MUST comply with the the following rules:

Author: The "MUST" here confuses the "SHOULD"s later. See #82

RadSec endpoints SHOULD NOT be pre-configured with a list of trusted CAs by the vendor or manufacturer that are enabled by default.
Instead, the endpoints SHOULD start off with an empty CA list as trust anchor.
The addition of a CA SHOULD be done only when manually configured by the administrator.
This does not preclude vendors or manufacturers including their trust list in their products, but the enabling of those lists should be a conscious decision by an administrator.

RADIUS/(D)TLS clients and servers MUST follow {{!RFC9525}} when validating endpoint identities. Specific details are provided below:

* Certificates MAY use wildcards in the identifiers of DNS names and realm names, but only as the complete, left-most label.
* RadSec clients validate the servers identity to match their local configuration, accepting the identity on the first match:
  * If the expected RadSec server is associated with a specific NAI realm, e.g. by dynamic discovery {{!RFC7585}} or static configuration, that realm is matched against the presented identifiers of any subjectAltName entry of type otherName whose name form is NAIRealm as defined in {{!RFC7585, Section 2.2}}.

>   * If the expected RadSec server was configured as a hostname, or the hostname was yielded by a dynamic discovery procedure, that name is matched against the presented identifiers of any subjectAltName entry of type dNSName {{!RFC5280}}. Since a dynamic discovery might by itself not be secured, implementations MAY require the use of DNSSEC {{!RFC4033}} to ensure the authenticity of the DNS result before considering this identity as valid.

Author: ```suggestion
  * If the expected RadSec server was configured as a hostname, or the hostname was yielded by a dynamic discovery procedure, that name is matched against the presented identifiers of any subjectAltName entry of type dNSName {{!RFC5280}}.  Since a dynamic discovery might by itself not be secured, implementations MAY require the use of DNSSEC {{!RFC4033}} to ensure the authenticity of the DNS result before considering this identity as valid.
```

  * Implementations MAY consider additional subjectAltName extensions to identify a client.
  * If configured by the administrator, the identity check MAY be omitted after a successful {{RFC5280}} trust chain check, e.g. if the client used dynamic lookup there is no configured client identity to verify. The clients authorization MUST then be validated using a certificate policy OID unless both endpoints are part of a trusted network.
* Implementations MAY allow configuration of a set of additional properties of the certificate to check for a endpoint's authorization to communicate (e.g. a set of allowed values presented in  subjectAltName entries of type uniformResourceIdentifier {{RFC5280}} or a set of allowed X.509v3 Certificate Policies).

### Authentication using X.509 certificate fingerprints (TLS-X.509-FINGERPRINT)

Radsec implementations SHOULD allow the configuration of a list of trusted certificates, identified via fingerprint of the DER encoded certificate bytes.

> When implementing this model, support for the SHA-256 has function is REQUIRED.

Author: This is a change in BCP14 language without any explanation.

This should at least be discussed. Leaving SHA-1 in was to keep backwards compatibility to the previous spec. (Maybe there were additional reasons, I'm not exactly sure)

There are numerous trust models in PKIX environments, and it is beyond the scope of this document to define how a particular deployment determines whether a client is trustworthy.
Implementations that want to support a wide variety of trust models should expose as many details of the presented certificate to the administrator as possible so that the trust model can be implemented by the administrator.

> As a suggestion, at least the following parameters of the X.509 client certificate should be exposed:

Author: ```suggestion
As a suggestion, at least the following information from the TLS connection and the X.509 client certificate should be exposed:
```

Implementations supporting session resumption MUST cache data during the initial full handshake, sufficient to allow authorization decisions to be made during resumption.
For RadSec servers, this should preferably be done using stateless session resumption as specified in {{!RFC5077}}, to reduce the resource usage for cached sessions.

When resuming a (D)TLS connection, both client and server MUST re-authorize the connection by using the original, cached data.
In particular, this includes the X.509 certificate (when using a PKIX trust model) as well as any policies associated with that identity such as restrictions on source IP address.
The re-authorization MUST give the same result as if a full handshake was performed at the time of resumption.

If cached data cannot be retrieved securely, resumption MUST NOT be done, by either immediately closing the connection or reverting to a full handshake.
If a resumed session is closed immediately after being established, the RadSec client MUST NOT re-attempt session resumption but perform a full TLS handshake instead.

## RADIUS packets
{:#radius_packets}

The RadSec specification does not change the client/server architecture of RADIUS.

> RadSec clients transmit the same packet types on the connection they initiated as a RadSec client would, and RadSec servers transmit the same packet types on the connections the server has accepted as a RadSec server would.

Author: ```suggestion
RadSec clients transmit the same packet types on the connection they initiated as a RADIUS/UDP client would, and RadSec servers transmit the same packet types on the connections the server has accepted as a RADIUS/UDP server would.
```

* For unwanted Accounting-Requests, the servers should respond with an Accounting-Response containing an Error-Cause attribute with the value 406 ("Unsupported Extension").

> {{RFC6614}} also recommends that a RadSec client observing this Accounting-Response should stop sending Accounting-Request packets to this server.

Author: ```suggestion
{{RFC6614}} also recommends that a RADIUS/TLS client observing this Accounting-Response should stop sending Accounting-Request packets to this server.
```

The lower bound SHOULD be configurable, but MUST NOT be less than 0.5 seconds.
In cases where the server closes the connection on an attempted TLS session resumption, the client MUST NOT use TLS session resumption for the following connection attempt.

RadSec clients MUST NOT immediately reconnect to a RadSec server after a failed connection attempt and MUST have a lower bound for the time between retries.
The lower bound SHOULD be configurable.
As only exception, a RadSec client MAY reconnect immediately iff the client attempted to resume a TLS session and the server closed the connection.
In this case the new connection attempt MUST NOT use TLS session resumption.

> 

Reviewer: Similar text already merged. Skip this.

Instead, the timers, MRC or MRD specifically, can be used to determine that a packet will most likely not receive an answer ever, for example because a packet loss has occurred in a later RADIUS hop or the home server ignores the RADIUS packet.

See {{duplicates_retransmissions}} for more discussion on retransmission behavior.

## Session limits and timeout

While RADIUS/UDP could be implemented mostly stateless (except for the requests in flight), both TCP/TLS as well as DTLS require state tracking of the underlying TLS connection and are thus subject to potential resource exhaustion. This is aggravated by the fact that RADIUS client/servers are often statically configured and thus form long-running endpoint relationships with long-running connections.

Implementations SHOULD have configurable limits on the number of open connections. When this maximum is reached and a new session is needed, the server MUST either drop an old session in order to open the new one or not create a new session.

The close notification of (D)TLS or underlying connections are not fully reliable, or connections might be unnecessarily kept alive by heartbeat or watchdog traffic, occupying resources.

> Therefore, both RadSec clients and servers MAY close connections after they have been idle for some time (no traffic except application layer watchdog). This idle timeout SHOULD be configurable within reasonable limits and it SHOULD be possible to disable idle timeouts completely.

Author: ```suggestion
Therefore, both RadSec clients and servers MAY close connections after they have been idle for some time (no traffic except application layer watchdog).
This idle timeout SHOULD be configurable within reasonable limits and it SHOULD be possible to disable idle timeouts completely.
```

The value of the idle timeout to use depends on the exact deployment and is a trade-of between resource usage on clients/servers and the overhead of opening new connections. Very short timeouts that are at or below the timeouts used for application layer watchdogs, typically in the range of 30-60s can be considered unreasonable. In contrast, the upper limit is much more difficult to define but may be in the range of 10 to 15min, depending on the available resources, or never
(disabling idle timeout) in scenarios where a permanently open connection is required.

## Behavior on session closure of incoming sessions

If an incoming (D)TLS connection is closed or broken, then there is no way to send a RADIUS response packet to the client.
The RadSec server behavior then depends on the types of packets being processed, and on the role of the server.

A RadSec server acting as proxy MUST discard all RADIUS packets associated with the closed connection.
As no response can be sent over the now-closed (D)TLS connection, any further processing of RADIUS packets is pointless.
A discarded RADIUS request packet be associated with a cached RADIUS response packet ({{RFC5080, Section

> 2.2.2}}), in which case the cached response paccket also MUST be discarded.

Author: ```suggestion
A discarded RADIUS request packet be associated with a cached RADIUS response packet ({{RFC5080, Section 2.2.2}}), in which case the cached response paccket also MUST be discarded.
```

* Response packets that do not match any outstanding request
* A server lacking the resources to process a request

> For request packets that would have been silently discarded in the previous specifications, servers SHOULD reply with a Protocol-Error {{!RFC7930, Section 4}} message to avoid request ID exhaustion, and servers SHOULD include an Error-Cause attribute indicating the type of failure. In any case, further processing of the original request MUST stop.

Author: ```suggestion
For request packets that would have been silently discarded in the previous specifications, servers SHOULD reply with a Protocol-Error {{!RFC7930, Section 4}} message to avoid request ID exhaustion, and servers SHOULD include an Error-Cause attribute indicating the type of failure.
In any case, further processing of the original request MUST stop.
```

Since the RADIUS packet header contains a `Length` field, the end of the RADIUS packet can be deduced.
The next RADIUS packet MUST be sent directly after the RADIUS packet before, that is, the endpoints MUST NOT add padding before, between, or after RADIUS packets.

When receiving RADIUS packets, a RADIUS/TLS endpoint MUST determine the borders of RADIUS packet based on the `Length` field in the RADIUS header.
Note that, due to the stream architecture of TLS, it is possible that a RADIUS packet is first received only partially, and the remainder of the packet is contained in following fragments.
Therefore, RADIUS/TLS endpoints MUST NOT assume that the packet length is invalid solely based on the currently available bytes in the stream.

As an implementation note, it is RECOMMENDED that RADIUS/TLS implementations do not pass a single RADIUS packet to the TLS library in multiple fragments and instead assemble the RADIUS packet and pass it as one unit, in order to avoid unnecessary overhead when sending or receiving (especially if every new write generates a new TLS record)

> and wait times on the other endpoint.

Author: ```suggestion
As an implementation note, it is RECOMMENDED that RADIUS/TLS implementations do not pass a single RADIUS packet to the TLS library in multiple fragments and instead assemble the RADIUS packet and pass it as one unit, in order to avoid unnecessary overhead when sending or receiving (especially if every new write generates a new TLS record) and wait times on the other endpoint.
```

#### Session Opening and Closing

Session tracking is subject to Denial-of-Service (DoS) attacks due to the ability of an attacker to forge UDP traffic.
RADIUS/DTLS servers SHOULD use the stateless cookie tracking technique described in

> {{!RFC6347, Section 4.2.1}}.

Author: ```suggestion
RADIUS/DTLS servers SHOULD use the stateless cookie tracking technique described in {{!RFC6347, Section 4.2.1}}.
```

Those issues are largely mitigated when (D)TLS is used as a transport method, since encryption and authorization is achieved on the (D)TLS layer.
The issues that are not mitigated by this specification are related to the RADIUS packet format and handling, which is unchanged in this specification.

> A few remaining security considerations and notes to administrators deploying RADIUS/(D)TLS are listed below.

Author: ```suggestion
A few remaining security considerations and notes to administrators deploying RadSec are listed below.
```

## RADIUS Proxies

RadSec provides authentication, integrity and confidentiality protection for RADIUS traffic between two RADIUS endpoints.
In the presence of proxies, these intermediate proxies can still inspect the individual RADIUS packets, i.e., "end-to-end" encryption on the RADIUS layer is not provided.
Where intermediate proxies are untrusted, it is desirable to use other RADIUS mechanisms to prevent RADIUS packet payload from inspection by such proxies.
One common method to protect passwords is the use of the Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) and EAP methods that utilize TLS.

> Additionally, when RADIUS proxies are used, the RADIUS client has no way of ensuring that the complete path of the RADIUS packet is protected, since RADIUS routing is done hop-by-hop and any intermediate proxy may be configured, after receiving a RADIUS packet via RadSec from one endpoint, to forward this packet to a different endpoint using the RADIUS/UDP transport profile.

Author: ```suggestion
Additionally, when RADIUS proxies are used, the RADIUS client has no way of ensuring that the complete path of the RADIUS packet is protected, since RADIUS routing is done hop-by-hop and any intermediate proxy may be configured, after receiving a RADIUS packet via RadSec from one peer, to forward this packet to a different peer using the RADIUS/UDP transport profile.
```

Where the confidentiality of the contents of the RADIUS packet across the whole path is required, organizational solutions need to be in place that ensure that every intermediate RADIUS proxy is configured to forward the RADIUS packets using RadSec as the transport.

One possible way to reduce the attack surface is to reduce the number of proxies in the overall proxy chain.
For this, dynamic discovery as defined in {{RFC7585}} can be used.

### Loopback-Attack on Endpoints acting as Server and Client

RadSec endpoints that are configured to act both as client and server, typically in a proxy configuration, may be vulnerable to attacks where an attacker mirrors back all traffic to the endpoint.
Therefore, endpoints that are capable of acting as both client and server SHOULD implement mitigations to avoid accepting connections from itself.
One example of a potentially vulnerable configuration is a setup where the RadSec server is accepting incoming connections from any address (or a wide address range).
Since the server may not be able to verify the certificate subject or subject alternate names, the trust is based on the certificate issuer or certificate OID.

> However, in this case, the client certificate which the RADIUS/(D)TLS endpoint uses for outgoing connections on the client side might also satisfy the trust check of the server side.

Author: ```suggestion
However, in this case, the client certificate which the RadSec endpoint uses for outgoing connections on the client side might also satisfy the trust check of the server side.
```

With RADIUS/UDP, any bogus RADIUS packet would fail the cryptographic checks and the server would silently discard the bogus packet.
For RadSec, the server needs to perform at least a partial TLS handshake to determine whether or not the client is authorized.
Performing a
(D)TLS handshake is more complex than the cryptographic check of a RADIUS packet.
An attacker could try to trigger a high number of

> (D)TLS handshakes at the same time, resulting in a high server load and potentially a Denial-of-Service.

Author: ```suggestion
Performing a (D)TLS handshake is more complex than the cryptographic check of a RADIUS packet.
An attacker could try to trigger a high number of (D)TLS handshakes at the same time, resulting in a high server load and potentially a Denial-of-Service.
```

## Migrating from RADIUS/UDP to RADIUS/(D)TLS

Since RADIUS/UDP security relies on the MD5 algorithm, which is considered insecure, using RADIUS/UDP over insecure networks is risky.

> We therefore recommend to migrate from RADIUS/UDP to RADIUS/(D)TLS.

Author: ```suggestion
We therefore recommend to migrate from RADIUS/UDP to RadSec.
```

Within this migration process, however, there are a few items that need to be considered by administrators.

Firstly, administrators may be tempted to simply migrate from RADIUS/UDP to RADIUS/(D)TLS with (D)TLS-PSK and reuse the RADIUS shared secret as (D)TLS-PSK.
While this may seem like an easy way to upgrade RADIUS/UDP to RADIUS/(D)TLS, the cryptographic problems with the RADIUS/UDP shared secret render the shared secret potentially compromised.
Using a potentially compromised shared secret as TLS-PSK compromises the whole TLS connection.

> Therefore, any shared secret used with RADIUS/UDP before MUST NOT be used with RADIUS/(D)TLS and (D)TLS-PSK.

Author: ```suggestion
Therefore, any shared secret used with RADIUS/UDP before MUST NOT be used with RadSec and (D)TLS-PSK.
```

Implementers MUST NOT reuse the configuration option for the RADIUS/UDP shared secret for the (D)TLS-PSK to prevent accidental reuse.

When upgrading from RADIUS/UDP to RADIUS/(D)TLS, there may be a period of time, where the connection between client and server is configured for both transport profiles.
If the old RADIUS/UDP configuration is left configured, but not used in normal operation, e.g. due to a fail-over configuration that prefers RADIUS/(D)TLS, an attacker could disrupt the RADIUS/(D)TLS communication and force a downgrade to RADIUS/UDP.
To prevent this it is RECOMMENDED that, when the migration to RADIUS/(D)TLS is completed, the RADIUS/UDP configuration is removed.

> RadSec clients MUST NOT fall back to RADIUS/UDP if the RADIUS/(D)TLS communication fails, unless explicitly configured this way.

Author: ```suggestion
When upgrading from RADIUS/UDP to RadSec, there may be a period of time, where the connection between client and server is configured for both transport profiles.
If the old RADIUS/UDP configuration is left configured, but not used in normal operation, e.g. due to a fail-over configuration that prefers RadSec, an attacker could disrupt the RadSec communication and force a downgrade to RADIUS/UDP.
To prevent this it is RECOMMENDED that, when the migration to RadSec is completed, the RADIUS/UDP configuration is removed.
RadSec clients MUST NOT fall back to RADIUS/UDP if the RadSec communication fails, unless explicitly configured this way.
```

All client subsystems should communicate with this local proxy, ideally over a loopback address.

The benefit of this configuration is that there is one place in the client that arbitrates all RADIUS traffic.

> Subsystems that do not implement RADIUS/(D)TLS can remain unaware of (D)TLS.

Author: ```suggestion
Subsystems that do not implement RadSec can remain unaware of (D)TLS.
```

(D)TLS sessions opened by the proxy can remain open for a long period of time, even when client subsystems are restarted.

> The proxy can do RADIUS/UDP to some servers and RADIUS/(D)TLS to others.

Author: ```suggestion
The proxy can do RADIUS/UDP to some servers and RadSec to others.
```

The proxy can do RADIUS/UDP to some servers and RadSec to others.

Delegation of responsibilities and separation of tasks are important security principles.

> By moving all RADIUS/(D)TLS knowledge to a (D)TLS-aware proxy, security analysis becomes simpler, and enforcement of correct security becomes easier.

Author: ```suggestion
By moving all RadSec knowledge to a (D)TLS-aware proxy, security analysis becomes simpler, and enforcement of correct security becomes easier.
```
